# The Role of Problem Attributes in Adolescent Mental Rotation
## An Analysis Using Mixed Effect Models

Numerous studies of mental rotation have sought to identify the strategies individuals use when solving problems. Specifically, sex difference research suggests that men commonly use whole-shape rotation (holistic) and women use feature-matching (analytic) strategies. However, classifying by strategy may be misleading, since individuals can be sensitive to unique problem features and may adapt their strategy as problems change to enhance performance. In mental rotation, some strategies may work equally well across different types of problems, while other strategies may be specific to one type of problem. For example, visualizing a whole-shape rotation may work on all trials, but is less effective as angle of rotation increases. Conversely, a feature-matching strategy may be more efficient at higher angles but only works when the image has distinguishing geometric features. To better-understand potential strategies, it is worth assessing the extent to which problem attributes impact performance in mental rotation. We examined the effect of four problem attributes (i.e., angle of rotation, trial type, geometric distinctions, and axis of rotation) on item-level accuracy and response time (in ms). A within-subject design was implemented, where 204 adolescent participants completed 84 trials of the block mental rotation task. For each trial, two three-dimensional objects were displayed on screen, and participants responded True if they believed the objects could be rotated to match or False if they believed the objects were mirror images. The match/mirror objects were rotated by varying degrees (0, 50, 100, or 150) along the X or Z-axis. They were categorized as having equal or unequal appendages (arm lengths) to examine geometric distinctions between trials. Linear and logistic mixed effect models were run on the data to control for the effect of trials nested within subjects. Overall, the four problem attributes accounted for 20% of the variance in accuracy and 25% of the variance in response time. The results showed that subjects responded: slower (b = 7.12, SE = .18, p < .01) and less accurately (e^b = -.009, SE = .0004, p < .01) when angle difference increased; faster (b = -495.03, SE = 18.9, p < .01) and more accurately (e^b = 0.43, SE = 0.04, p < .01) on match trials; slower (b = 58.04, SE = 17.9, p < .01) and less accurately (e^b = -0.28, SE = 0.04, p < .01) when objects had equal arm lengths. The axis of rotation only had a main effect on accuracy (e^b = -0.63, SE = 0.06, p < .01), but there was a significant interaction effect between axis of rotation and trial type. Participants responded faster (b = -115.8, SE = 37.7, p < .01) and more accurately (e^b = .91, SE = .08, p < .01) on match trials rotated along the X-axis. The significant effect of angle of rotation provides evidence that mental rotation is being engaged. However, given that performance was also impacted by problem attributes, adolescents may be adapting their mental processes as problems change. These results help inform future research on the role that problem characteristics play when classifying by strategy
